# A quick primer on phonology

The sounds of a lanugage are not completely random, but have a systematic
structure. (The same applies of course to the components – locations, movements,
and hand shapes – of signs in a sign language. I will unfortunately have to
focus on spoken languages for the remainder.) The field of *phonology* studies
the sound systems of languages, focussing on their function in distinguishing
different words. In this perspective, all the different realizations and
variants of a sound unit which do not turn one word into another word are
abstracted away. Such a sound unit that distinguishes one word from another word
is then called a *phoneme*. In order to distinguish transcriptions that operate
on this level of analysis from others phonemic transcriptions are usually
delimited by forward slashes: /tεst/. (The other two important transcripion
levels this contrasts with are [phonetic transcriptions](IPATranscription.md),
delimited with square brackets: [tʰεstʰ], and [orthographic transcriptions](...)
transcriptions, with angular brackets: ⟨test⟩)

Because phonemes are the sounds that distinguish different words, a pair of
words that differ in a single sound, known as a *minimal pair*, is the most
straightforward way to identify phoneme distinctions. For example, the words
⟨bed⟩ [bεd] and ⟨bad⟩ [bæd] are a minimal pair for the distinction of /ε/ vs.
/æ/ in English, while ⟨bed⟩ [bεd] and ⟨bet⟩ [bεtʰ] tell us that /d/ and /t/ are
different phonemes.

Sometimes, the same phoneme is realized by different sounds in diffent contexts.
English has so many different varieties that it is difficult to name one such
effect that would make sense to all speakers, but German has a pretty clear
example: The ⟨ch⟩, which occur for example in ⟨Loch⟩ and ⟨ich⟩, is realized in
two different ways depending on the previous vowel: After low vowels, like in
⟨Loch⟩, it is realized as [x] (so like the Scottish word), while after high
vowels it becomes [ç] (the sound some varieties of English use at the start of
⟨huge⟩ [çu:dʒ]). There is – and cannot be, because of this contextual rule – two
German words that are identical apart from one having [x] where the other one
has [ç], so these are just two different realizations, *allophones*, of the same
phoneme /x/.

Phonemes are language specific: In most varieties of English, the two words ⟨bed⟩
 and ⟨bad⟩  are pronounced differently, while German has only one
/ε/-Phoneme, which occurs in both ⟨Bässen⟩ and ⟨besseren⟩. Specifically, the
*phoneme inventory* of a language is already an analysis (often the first
section in a ‘grammar’, that is, a book describing a language), and can depend
on the analysis of other parts of the language. It is also to some extent choice
and convention how a phoneme is transcribed. Some phonologists use the phonetic
transcription of the most characteristic sound (like /ɹ/ or /kʰ/ in English),
while others use simpler notation, avoiding special characters (in this case /k/
and /r/ respectively).

With this caveat noted, what *do* we know about phonemes and their distribution
within and between languages?

# Phoneme inventories
There is a database called [PHOIBLE](https://phoible.org/) [@phoible] which
lists the phoneme inventories of 2'186 of the world's languages, aggregated from
different sources. For some languages, PHOIBLE lists different sources that
disagree with each other.

Because phoneme inventories are part of a language system, and because
conventions for the notation of phonemes differ, the search for a ‘typical’
phoneme inventory cannot just look at the frequencies of different phonemes as
given in PHOIBLE, but needs a bit more consideration.


