# “Yes, but is it language?”

## What do we know, quantitatively, about how languages work, and what do not know? And what is definitely *not* language?

This is a [collection of] blog [post DRAFTS] by Gereon Kaiping, dedicated to
random quantitative topics in comparative linguistics: Most posts will deal with
the patterns found in different languages, present and past (at least where data
is available). The goal is to not only talk about data-driven language science,
but also show you how to do it at home:

I shall root my posts in the current scientific knowledge, but I will try to be
self-contained and not assume a linguistics or science background. However, part
of the science here is data science, and telling you about that without actually
showing you how it's done would be a bit of a waste, wouldn't it?

You may not be able to go out to meet speakers of interesting languages (even
more true in 2020/2021 than otherwise, because you probably have interesting
languages and language contact effects right in your city). And you can not get
random people to read texts for you under experimental conditions (or whatever
experimental linguists have their test subjects do) – that's not only
unfeasible, but also human experimentation, and therefore rightly subject to
ethical approval.

I hope you can enjoy the science knowing any programming, but *if* you know how
to read & run code: When some results can be derived from publically available
data using a small amount of Python code, I will show snippets in the blog post,
and the whole analysis will be available from
[Github](https://github.com/Anaphory/blog) in addition.

## You have a question about languages?

If you have a quantitative question which is connected to languages in general
and not to one particular language, feel free to send it to me at
yesbutisitlanguage@model-ling.eu – If I can find quantitative data to answer it,
or to prove that we cannot answer it (maybe at all, maybe for now), I shall try
to do that and post the answer.
